# Intro

- A well designed computational process executes programs **precisely** and **accurately**.
- A novice programmer must learn to understand and to anticipate the consequences of their programs.
  - Real world programming requires care, expertise, and wisdom.

**Master programmers can...**
- Organize programs so that they can be reasonably sure that the resulting process will perform the task as intended
- The can visualize their code before even writing it.
- The know how to structure programs so that unanticipated problems do not lead to catastrophic consequences.
- When problems do occur, they know how to debug their program.

- Design programs in a modular manner. It makes it easy to:
  - construct
  - replace
  - debug

---

**Programming In Lisp**
- Lisp was invented in the late 1950s as a formalism for reasoning about the use of certain kinds of logical expressions, called recursion equations.
- Lisp is an acronym for **LIS**t **P**rocessing
- Lisp is a practical programming language.
- A Lisp interpreter is a machine that carries out processes described in the Lisp language.
- Lisp started out as an experimental language, which in it's early days was slow.
  - However over time it's performance increased with it's popularity.
- Lisp now has a family  of dialects.
  - The dialect we'll be using in this book is called **Scheme**.
- **The language possesses unique features that make it an excellent medium for studying important programming constructs and data structures and for relating them to the linguistic features that support them.**

# 1.1 The Elements of Programming

- When we describe a language, we should pay attention to the means that the language provides for combining simple ideas to form more complex ideas.
- Every powerful language has three mechanisms to accomplish this:
  - **primitive expressions**, which represent the simplest entities the language is concerned with
  - **means of combination**, by which compound elements are built from smaller ones
  - **means of abstraction**, by which compound elements can be named and manipulated as units

- In programming we deal with two kinds of elements:
  - procedures
  - data
- Data is the "stuff" we want to manipulate
- Procedures are descriptions of the rules for manipulating the data.
- Any powerful programming language should be able to describe primitive data and primitive procedures and should have methods for combining and abstracting procedures and data.

## 1.1.1 Expressions
_Note: The following expressions and the rest of the expressions throughout the book is using the Scheme dialect of Lisp_

- When looking at a terminal, we type an expression. The interpreter responds by displaying the result of its evaluating that expression.

- One kind of primitive expression you might type is a number.
  ```
    > 635
    635
  ```

- A primitive procedure, like + or \*, can be used to form a compound expression.
  ```
    > (+ 1 2)
    3

    > (- 100 40)
    60

    > (* 5 100)
    500

    > (/ 9 3)
    3

    > (+ 7.7 10)
    17.7
  ```
- Expressions like the ones above are called combinations. That is because we are creating a list of expressions within parentheses.
- The left most element in the list is called the **operand**.
- The value of a combination is obtained by applying the procedure specified by the operator to the **arguments** that are the values of the operands
- The convention of placing the operator to the left of the operands is known as **prefix notation**
  - Though this looks weird, there are some benefits to this style:
    - can accommodate procedures that may take an arbitrary number of arguments.
      ```
        > (+ 1 2 3 4 5)
        15
      ```
    - it extends in a straight forward way, which allows for combinations to be nested.
      ```
        > (+ (* 3 5) (- 10 6))
        19
      ```

- No matter the formatting long single-line combinations or pretty printing, the interpreter will always
  - read the expression typed into the terminal
  - evaluate the expression
  - print the result
- This mode of operation is known as **read-eval-print loop**

## 1.1.2 Naming and the Environment
- A critical aspect of a programming language is the means it provides for using names to refer to computational objects.
- We say that the name identifies a **variable** whose **value** is the object.

> _Note: at this point I started to install Scheme on Mac OSX. You first need to install [XQuartz](http://xquartz.macosforge.org/landing/) before installing Scheme. To install Scheme, use homebrew: `brew install mit-scheme`. Once it installs you can run the Scheme interpreter in the command line by typing the command `scheme`_

- In Scheme `define` is how we name things:
  ```
    > (define size 2)

    > size
    2

    > (* 5 size)
    10
  ```
- `define` is our language's simplest means of abstraction, for it allows us to use simple names to refer to the results of compound operations.
- In general, computational objects may have very complex structures, and it would be extremely inconvenient to have to remember and repeat their details each time we want to use them.

- The interpreter must maintain some sort of memory that keeps track of the name-object pairs. This memory is called the **environment**.

## 1.1.3 Evaluating Combinations

- When evaluating combinations, the interpreter follows this procedure:
  1. Evaluate the subexpressions of the combinations
  2. Apply the procedure that us the value of the leftmost subexpression (the operator) to the arguments that are the values of the other subsequent expressions (the operands).
- Take note that the first step dictates that in order to accomplish the evaluation process for a combination we must first perform the evaluation process on each element of the combination.
  - _Thus, the evaluation rule is **recursive** in nature, that is, it includes, as one of its steps, the need to invoke the rule itself._

- In a tree structure, **terminal nodes** are nodes on a tree that have no branches stemming from them.

- Viewing evaluations in terms of a tree, we can imagine that the values of the operands percolate upward, starting from the terminal nodes and then combing at higher and higher levels.
- The _**"percolate values upward"**_ form of the evaluation is an example of a general kind of process known as **tree accumulation**.

The interpreter or ourself is not always evaluating combinations.
- primitive expressions such as numerals, built-in operators, or other names

We take care of primitive cases by stipulating that:
 - the values of numerals are the numbers that they name
 - the values of built-in operators are the machine instruction sequences that carry out the corresponding operations
 - the values of the other names are the objects associated with those names in the environment

- A key point to notice is the role of the environment in determining the meaning of the symbols in expressions.

- when defining a value using `define`, the statement `(define x 3)` is not a combination.
  - such expressions to the general evaluation rule are called **special forms**
  - each **special form** has it's own evaluation rule.
  - The various kinds of expressions (each with it's associated evaluation rule) constitutes the syntax of the programming language.

## 1.1.4 Compound Procedures
There are some elements that must appear in any powerful programming language:
 - Numbers and arithmetic operations are primitive data and procedures
 - Nesting of combinations provides a means of combining operations
 - Definitions that associate names with values provide a limited means of abstraction

- _**procedure definitions**_ give a much more powerful abstraction technique by which a compound operation can be given a name and then referred to as a unit.

- _Note:_ A **compound procedure** can be thought of as a method - just like in ruby

The general form of a procedure definition looks like the following:
  ```
    (define (<NAME> <FORMAL PARAMETERS>)
      <BODY>)
  ```
  - The `name` is a symbol to be associated with the procedure definition in the environment.
  - The `formal parameters` are the names used within the body of the procedure to refer to the corresponding arguments of the procedure.
  - The `body` is an expression that will yield the value of the procedure application when the formal parameters are replaced by the actual arguments to which the procedure is applied.

- You can use previously defined procedures in new procedure definitions.
- Compound procedures are used in exactly the same way as primitive procedures.

## 1.1.5 The Substitution Model for Procedure Application
To evaluate a combination whose operator names a compound procedure, the interpreter follows much the same process as for combinations whose operators name primitive procedures as arguments.

The substitution model is when the interpreter substitutes all known values to the procedure.
- It can be taken as a model that determines "meaning" of procedure applications

**Applicative order versus Normal order**

Normal order:
  - When you substitute operand expressions for parameters until it obtained an expression involving only primitive operands, and would then perform the evaluation.
  This is known as "Fully expand and then reduce"

Applicative Order:
  - The method which Lisp's interpreter actually uses
  - Better efficiency due to avoiding multiple evaluations of the same procedure
  - "evaluate the arguments and then apply"

- Normal and Applicative order will always produce the same result.

## 1.1.6 Conditional Expressions and Predicates
Taking different actions based on different scenarios is called **case analysis**
  - In Lisp there is a special form notation to do a case analysis called `cond` (which stands for "conditional")
    ```
      (cond (<P1> <e1>)
            (<P2> <e2>)
            ...
            (<Pn> <en>))
    ```
    - Each pair is called a **clause**
    - The first expression in each pair is a **_predicate_** -- That is an expression whose value is interpreted as either true or false.
    - The execution of the code is run from top to bottom until it finds a predicate whose expression is true. In which case the interpreter returns the the value of the corresponding **_consequent expression_** (`e`)
    - If none of the predicates are found to be true then the value `cond` returns is `undefined`
    ```
      (define (abs x)
        (cond ((> x 0) x)
              ((= x 0) 0)
              ((< x 0) (- x))))
    ```
  - The word predicate is used for procedures that return true or false, as well as for expressions that evaluate to true or false.

  - `else` is a special symbol that can be used in place of the `<p>` in the final clause of the `cond`.

  - `if` is another special form. It is a restricted type of condition that can be used when there are precisely two cases in the case analysis.
    ```
      (if <predicate> <consequent> <alternative>)
    ```

  - In addition to primitive predicates such as `<`, `=`, and `>`, there are logical composition operations, which enable us to construct compound predicates
    - `and` `or` and `not`
      ```
        (and <e1> ... <en>)
        (or <e1> ... <en>)
        (not <e>)
      ```
    - Notice that `and` and `or` are special forms, not procedures, because the subexpressions are not necessarily all evaluated.
    - `not` is an ordinary procedure.

## 1.1.7 Square Roots by Newton's Method
- Procedures, are much like ordinary mathematical functions. They specify a value that is determined by one or more parameters.
- In Mathematics we are usually concerned with declarative (what is) descriptions, whereas in computer science we are usually concerned with imperative (how to) descriptions.

## 1.1.8 Procedures as Black-Box Abstractions
The idea of being able to define a procedure in terms of itself may be disturbing: it may seem unclear how such a "circular" definition could make sense at all.

- Programs can be viewed as clusters of procedures that mirror the decomposition of the problem into subproblems.
- The importance of this decomposition strategy is not simply that one is dividing the program into parts, but rather it is crucial that each procedure accomplishes an **_identifiable task_** that can be used as a module in defining other procedures.
- We are not concerned with _how_ the procedure computes its result, only with the fact that it does compute.

- **procedural abstractions** is simply an abstraction of a procedure.
- At these levels of abstraction any procedure that can compute the correct result is equally good as another procedure.
- A procedural definition should be able to suppress detail. Meaning a user should not need to know how the procedure is implemented in order to use it.

**Local Names**
  One detail of a procedure's implementation that should not matter to the user of the procedure is the implementer's choice of names for the procedure's formal parameters.
    ```
      // Same thing, parameter name's do not matter
      (define (square x) (* x x))
      (define (square y) (* y y))
    ```
  - This principle - that the meaning of a procedure should be independent of the parameter names used by its author - seems on the surface to be self-evident, but its consequences are profound.

  - **_bound variable_** - A formal parameter of a procedure has a very special role in the procedure definitions, in that it doesn't matter what the name of the formal parameter has.
  - If a variable is not bound, we that it is **_free_**.
  - The set of expressions for which a binding defines a name is called the **_scope_** of that name.

**Internal definitions and block structure**
  The formal parameters of a procedure are local to the body of the procedure.

  - Nesting definitions, called **_block structure_**, is basically the right solution to the simplest name-packaging problem.
  - In the block structure below, `x` gets its value from the argument with which the enclosing procure `sqrt` is called.
    - This discipline is called **_lexical scoping_**
    ```
      (define (sqrt x)
        (define (good_enough? guess x)
          (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))
        (define (improve guess x) (average guess (/ x guess)))
        (define (sqrt-iter guess x)
          (if (good_enough? guess x)
            guess
            (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)))
        (sqrt-iter 1.0 x))
    ```
  - We will use block structure extensively to help us break up large programs into tractable pieces.


